4 Script
========

  1/9 I'm Jai Jeffryes and I'm an analyst and programmer at the Sulzer
  Neuroscience Laboratory at Columbia University.

  2/9 I'm waving to you from the lab (while getting photobombed). On the
  left of the screen is Dr. David Sulzer, the principal investigator of
  the lab and my boss. The lab researches the dopamine system, which
  figures prominently in Parkinson's Disease, schizophrenia, and drugs
  of abuse. On the right of the screen is Dr. Mahalakshmi
  Somayaji. Since I joined the lab in March, my main responsibility has
  been supporting Maha's research into the effects of amphetamine on the
  neurotransmitter, dopamine.

  3/9 Signal propagates in a neuron from dendrites, seen on the left, to
  the axon terminals, detailed on the right. The bubbles in the axon
  terminal represent synaptic vesicles, tiny sacks containing molecules
  of dopamine. They transmit dopamine by fusing with the plasma membrane
  and discharging their cargo into the synaptic cleft. A few such
  molecules are depicted here. Some of those will bind with
  neurotransmitter receptors in the dendritic spines of the adjacent
  neuron. The rest will be pumped back up into the axon terminal. Keep
  in mind these dual processes of release and reuptake.

  4/9 We can model the kinetics of dopamine in a one-dimensional random
  walk of its diffusion. The release locations are modeled here from
  left to right. Here I release 2.75 micromolar of dopamine. Time slices
  proceed downwards on the matrix. In the next time slice, half of the
  molecules will diffuse to the left neighbor and half to the
  right. Then reuptake reduces the concentration. Now, the next site
  will diffuse to the left and right in the time slice after that. I cut
  out a lot of the matrix. It propogates like this to a column
  representing a measuring electrode, where you see the concentration of
  dopamine over time.

  5/9 The reduction in dopamine from reuptake is given by the
  Michaelis-Menten equation. Note the quantity, km, which expresses the
  affinity between dopamine and its target transporter. If km is
  lowered, the reuptake increases.

  6/9 Thus, I can plot a simulation of dopamine concentration. We see
  release followed by reuptake. If I reduce km from 2 to .8, the decay
  of the concentration of dopamine is more rapid in the model.

  7/9 This is a plot of the data I receive from Maha. She stimulates a
  mouse brain every two minutes and it evokes dopamine release. Animal
  research can be a sensitive subject. I can tell you that it is highly
  regulated, the animals are anesthetized and they feel nothing.

  Note the change in height of the peaks. Here, in the fourth
  stimulation, is where Maha administers amphetamine. Amphetamine both
  raises dopamine release and reduces its reuptake, but how much of
  each?  You can't tell from this plot, for the concentration is the net
  of the two.

  Maha believes she has learned something novel about the mechanism of
  amphetamine's influence on dopamine release. To demonstrate it, she
  needs to isolate and quantify dopamine's release and reuptake.

  8/9 We do this by superimposing the model on the data from a single
  stimulus. The model is the green line, Maha's data is red. My first
  estimate isn't very good. I've underestimated the release, so the peak
  height is too low, and I've underestimated the reuptake so the curve
  is spread too widely. I adjust the two until I find a good fit. The
  correlation is quantified by the statistic r-squared.

  9/9 I've inferred measures of release and reuptake based on the model,
  and hopefully these estimates are sufficiently reliable for Maha to
  draw conclusions about the mechanism of dopamine kinetics. Her
  hypothesis involves a particular protein playing a role in vesicular
  fusion. Her control for the experiment is so-called knock out mice,
  animals genetically engineered to lack the protein of interest.

  Whatever Maha learns, she'll publish, and I will join the byline as
  one of the co-authors. My contribution is an R package hosted on
  GitHub and my analysis.

  That concludes my presentation, Dr. Catlin.
